# SWAT Modeling for the Arizona Tri-University Recharge Project

The Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) is a landscape and basin-scale hydrologic model developed by the USDA-ARS, now with a global user community taking advantage of its capabilities in complex water, sediment, and nutrient routing. SWAT, and its fully updated version SWAT+, couple plant growth with meteorologic, runoff, and channel processes. While the model was initially developed as a largely agricultural tool, updates in recent years (including those in SWAT+) have allowed for more accurate simulations of mixed use landscapes- including natural environments- and underlying ecohydrological dynamics.

For the ATUR project, SWAT and SWAT+ (hereafter called SWAT(+)) are two tools we are using to understand the hydrologic impacts of landscape management strategies, including but not limited to in-stream structures to increase ponding, vegetation thinning and nuisance species removal, and concentration of runoff into high-infiltration areas. The model's strengths lay in the representation of streamflow, which is what most model users calibrate and validate their simulations against; for this project, where we are more broadly evaluating management impacts on the partitioning of precipitation, it is essential that we also adequately simulate evapotranspiration and recharge to explicitly resolve how water is distributed.

The basic structure of SWAT(+) requires inputs of a digital elevation model as well as land cover and soils data. The study area (watershed) is semi-discretized into hydrological response units (HRU), which each contain a single land cover type, soil type, and "slope band" (determined by the user; for example, less than 15% slope). The model takes incoming precipitation and partitions it between infiltration, runoff, and evapotranspiration based on soil/hillslope properties and vegetation function. 

SWAT+ and a newer module called _gwflow_ now allow for the inclusion of lateral groundwater flow within basins. In simulations with default settings, we have observed an underestimation of modeled ET in dry seasons (pre-monsoon "arid foresummer") and across the year in places with phreatophytic vegetation, where plants are rooted in and using water directly from the saturated zone. Subsurface processes are necessary to supply riparian plant communities with moisture for transpiration and results in an "open" water balance in these ecosystems, where precipitation is much less than the sum of ET, infiltration, and runoff. While SWAT(+) are useful tools for resolving the water balance of vertical fluxes, a hurdle for this project will be refining this subsurface lateral flow in order to accurately capture the paths that groundwater takes to eventually flow to the atmosphere.

## References: 

Bieger, Katrin, Jeffrey G. Arnold, Hendrik Rathjens, Michael J. White, David D. Bosch, Peter M. Allen, Martin Volk, and Raghavan Srinivasan, 2017. Introduction to SWAT+, a Completely Restructured Version of the Soil and Water Assessment Tool. Journal of the American Water Resources Association (JAWRA) 53(1):115-130. DOI: 10.1111/1752-1688.12482

https://swat.tamu.edu/
